.TH SAMBAM 1 "February 2026" "sambam" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
sambam \- instant SMB/CIFS file sharing
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B sambam
.RI [ options ]
.RI [ directory ]
.br
.B sambam
.B stop
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B sambam
starts a lightweight SMB server to share local directories with Windows, macOS, and Linux clients.
By default, it shares the current directory using the directory name as share name.
.SH CONFIGURATION
Configuration is loaded in this order, with later layers overriding keys set earlier:
.IP "1." 4
.I /etc/sambamrc
.IP "2." 4
.I ~/.sambamrc
.IP "3." 4
.I ./.sambamrc
.PP
Command-line flags override all config file values.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BR "-n, --name" " <name|name:path>"
Share name or name:path pair. Repeatable.
.TP
.BR "-l, --listen" " <address>"
Listen address (default: 0.0.0.0:445).
.TP
.BR "-r, --readonly"
Make share read-only.
.TP
.BR "--username" " <name>"
Require authentication with this username.
.TP
.BR "--password" " <password>"
Authentication password (random if omitted with --username).
.TP
.BR "--expire" " <duration>"
Auto-shutdown after duration (for example: 30m, 1h, 2h30m).
.TP
.BR "-v, --verbose"
Show activity logs. Use -vv for extended logs and -vvv for full trace.
.TP
.BR "--trace"
Enable full protocol trace (equivalent to -vvv).
.TP
.BR "--hide-dotfiles"
Hide files starting with '.' from listings.
.TP
.BR "-d, --daemon"
Run in background. Stop with
.B sambam stop
.
.TP
.BR "-p, --pidfile" " <path>"
PID file path (default: /tmp/sambam.pid).
.TP
.BR "-L, --logfile" " <path>"
Log file path.
.TP
.BR "-V, --version"
Show version and exit.
.TP
.BR "-h, --help"
Show help and exit.
.SH EXAMPLES
.TP
Share current directory:
.B sambam
.TP
Share a specific directory:
.B sambam /path/to/folder
.TP
Share read-only:
.B sambam -r /data
.TP
Run as daemon:
.B sambam -d /data
.br
.B sambam stop
.SH FILES
.TP
.I /etc/sambamrc
System-wide configuration.
.TP
.I ~/.sambamrc
User configuration.
.TP
.I ./.sambamrc
Project-local overrides.
.SH EXIT STATUS
Returns 0 on success, non-zero on error.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR mount.cifs (8),
.BR smbclient (1)
